Now that we have an example of a full application, we can use Gradle to build and run the project,
which means we call Gradle directly to read the structure or the model of our software project to do
something useful with it.
Note that although we never ran Gradle directly ourselves, Intel always ran it for us in the background
when we did the project.
So we actually use Gradle already to do a certain building without noticing it directly.
The central concept in Gradle to actually do some work is the task, the greater task.
Each plugin you apply, if it's not only a convention plug in, but a functional plugin that adds functionality
like the Java plugin adding functionality for compiling Java code, then the plugin adds tasks tasks
as an available on the project that applied to plugin to do certain things with the data, the files
that are in the corresponding project.
For Application project.
We now have the functionality through greater tasks to compile the code, but also to run the application
to see which tasks are available in a project.
You can use a greater view in IntelliJ.
So here we can find, for example, the run task of the project on the command line where we can call
Gradle through the grade of the Gradle script.
You can use a specific task called tasks, which prints out all the tasks available on the project.
So that's a way to get this information outside of the ID.
To take a closer look.
What is happening on Google is running.
We'll now call it from the command line.
You could also trick out gradle build by double clicking one of the tasks in the Google view in intelligence.
If you use the command line, you can give one or several tasks to Gradle.
The task is addressed by a pass, which is colon name of the component or subproject which the task
is in colon task name.
So we could say we would like Gradle to execute the app run task.
I'll let this console play parameter here because then we get a listed output of what Gradle was doing
during the build.
Let's just run this.
At the end of the build output, we can see that our message was printed so our application did run
and printed the message.
Before that, we also see that Quayle executed the run to task.
But what we can also see is that a bunch of other tasks were executed before.
That's a very important aspect to understand about gradle tasks.
Each task has inputs and potentially outputs.
So the rum task has as input a number of jars.
The so called runtime class pass the runtime class path is not just a list of folders.
This class files Gradle knows where these class files are produced.
So it knows that in order to get the runtime class pass, which is an input to the run task, it needs
to execute other tasks that produce the folders that are in the runtime class path as an output.
In this case, these are compiler Java tasks that produced class files for the project, but also for
its dependencies.
Data Model Project and the Business Logic Project.
A compiled Java task like the Business Logic Compiler Java task has the business logic source files
input, but it also has a so-called compiler class path which may contain other classes, folders or
jobs that are needed for compilation.
In the case of the business logic component, it depends on our data model component.
So another input to the compiler Java task of the business logic component are the classes from the
data model project, which are in turn produced by the compiler Java Task Offset Project.
That's why the task here did run in this order because one task depended on the other again.
So by knowing about the inputs and outputs of each task and how these are connected, Gradle can build
a task graph when you call it.
So if we call Gradle with the app run task, Gradle will build up this graph and know which task to
execute and in which order.
So this is one of the things that makes Gradle such a powerful tool.
We'll learn in the follow up lectures how you can configure tasks and even add your own ones and will
set build your own path graphs with your own automation needs and gradle will automatically figure out
which thing it needs to execute for certain build and which are not.
So for example, if we would just call the data model compiler Java task, Gradle wouldn't execute any
other tasks in addition, because there's no other things needed except for the source code inside the
data model project because the data model project does not have any dependencies.
We can also see if we look further up this list is that before any task of our production code components
was executed, the Gradle plugin build was built.
So tasks from that build that compile our own convention plugins were executed first to make these plugins
available at this part.
Didn't take up any time at all.
As we can see here, all these tasks in our Java plugins project are marked with up to date, which
means that Gradle already has the result of this task once available.
This is because this was built earlier when we did the integrating and IntelliJ needed these plugins
to actually build up the right model of our main project, and that's the incremental building mechanism
of Gradle.
Because knowing about the task input and output not only allows Gradle to construct the task graph and
execute only the needed task in the right order.
It also allows Gradle to skip tasks that already produced an output for certain input.
So we'll remember what the input of the output was and which output was produced, and if the input
next time match it, it just reuses the output from the and before.
So if we call Gradle with the task again, we can now see that all the tasks up to date and Gradle almost
took no time at all for building.
Let's go into our application class and change some details there.
And now we run the build again.
And we can see that only the compiler Java class of the application was re executed or the other compilation
is still up to date.
Because the other components are independent of the component.
They are not affected by this code change.
So we will only recompile the code that is affected by a change.
And the same is true for any task because the up to date checking mechanism is in the core of gradle
and applies for all tasks.
Also tasks from community plugins or even your own tasks if you implement your own, which we'll look
at later.
Another mechanism which is very related and also uses a task inputs and outputs is the build cache.
It allows Gradle to not only reuse the results of the previous build run, but results from any build
run that was done before.
So if you switch between different setups, like switching between different branches, Gradle can reuse
build results from earlier when you switch back on a branch we have been on before.
So Bill Cash, unfortunately, is not yet enabled by default, although it could be the case that this
will happen in grade eight.
For now, I can just recommend anyone to enable it.
It's a stable feature because it's such a fundamental system which creator needs to know details about
when it starts up.
You can't configure this inside your build script and there's an additional file for these kind of things,
which is the greater properties file.
We put this file next to all settings file.
And inside this file we set the orc gradle caching property to.
True.
Let's look at the effect this has.
Go back to the application class and change something again.
Let's run the good ones.
We can see the compilation was executed.
Go into the class again and make a change.
Runs a bit again.
Now go back into the class and revert the change you did before.
If you run the ball now, you can see that Gray took the result from cash because now we ran a build
which was exactly the same inputs to the compiled Java task as we already had before.
So Gradle had an entry in its cache for this and just copied the result of the task from there.
By the way, all the results typical add up in a folder called Build in the corresponding project.
These folders may be hidden by IntelliJ so you can make them visible here by showing excluded files.
If we go into the build folder of the project, for example, we can find the compiler classes here
and other results.
So build cache if you wonder about that.
It's located in a folder called Dot Gradle inside the user directory.
Something you typically don't need to look into.
If a result can be taken from cash, it's copied from the build cash back into the corresponding place
in the build folder.
Instead of really executing the task, we have now seen how to execute available and got an introduction
to the task concept of Gradle.
We have seen that a task that does some work has inputs and potentially outputs.
If a task has inputs and outputs, Gradle can reuse results from the previous build run automatically.
Or use results from the cache if the cache is enabled.
It also uses this information to build the task graph.
When you start a build, which means you only define the target, so which task you eventually want
to execute and Gradle automatically figures out which other tasks need to run in which order.
Potentially skipping the actual run if results are taking through up to date check or through the cash.
Now that we learned about the basics of Cradle Stars concept, we can dive deeper into how configuring
tasks when that is needed and how you can register or even implement your own tasks.